spies for our alleged Russian
interference he's showing no sign of
abating covert operations Russia's
military forces invade Ukraine rumors of
dark influence one of president Putin's
critics lies dead as the world wonders
how far Russia will go there's a clue in
a shocking case from a decade ago it's
full story still untold the murder of a
British citizen on British soil
using the deadliest poison known to man
a state-sponsored killing in London by
means of radioactivity is quite
extraordinary ten years on Alexander
Litvinenko's killings are still at large
and for his family no justice did the
Russian state day I just let the
evidence speak for itself the detectives
who investigated the murder have never
before spoken but now they Litvinenko's
Widow and the son he left behind
tell the inside story for the first time
it's not only about the investigation of
crime it's right story how to be human
it's a story that reads like a cold war
crime thriller but is darker than any
fiction this order can be given by only
one person president of the Russian
Federation Vladimir Putin
[Music]
I remember sitting in my office on the
15th floor of Scotland Yard when an
officer came in and the story he told
was quite extraordinary
there was a man lying in a hospital bed
in North London who was claiming that he
was a former KGB officer and that he had
been poisoned the patient had given his
name as edwin carter had been admitted
two weeks earlier it was explained to us
that edwin carter was seriously ill they
didn't know what was wrong with him the
patient had ulcers in his throat and he
could not eat or drink
he believed you'd been poisoned with the
heavy-metal thallium
[Music]
it was consistent with some of his signs
and symptoms so for example he'd lost
his hair his blood counts had dropped he
was very anxious and seemed very
preoccupied in trying to make the point
that something illegal had been done
I asked whether they could guarantee
that cars would survive until the
following morning learning the absence
of then being able to give us that
guarantee or I decided that we should
start getting his account just after
midnight the police started recording
his interview he began with an
astonishing claim
my name is Edwin Carter I am British
citizen I have in Russian I have named
Alexander Litvinenko I am former KGB FSB
officer my rank lieutenant colonel my
position deputy head of section
top-secret department of FSB of course
at that time we had no way of knowing
whether what Edwin Carter was saying was
true can I ask you to tell us what you
think has happened to you I have no
doubt that they poison me
all that is remain for me it's to prove
this with medical examination she to
mention someone who's quite ill
potentially hallucinating and then
starts to tell people and unravel his
story that he's not really a pin Carter
he's actually a former KGB colonel and
he's been poisoned by vladimir putin's
orders you can understand them people
might have met that suggestion with some
disbelief but Carter did offer the
police one concrete lead
the number of a contact he claimed to
have had regular meetings with at a
London book show
on 31st October at about 4:00 p.m. I had
a meeting arranged with the person about
I like to talk here because I have some
commitments you can contact the person
when the police called the number a man
known early as Martin came to the
hospital Martin an mi6 officer confirmed
the patient was Alexander or Sasha
Litvinenko a former KGB agent now
advised in mi6 on Russian organized
crime
Scotland Yard realized this would be no
ordinary investigation let's try and
understand why zeal let's try and get a
story from him he was still able to talk
was a criminal mystery of medical
mystery find out which camp it fell into
if it was medical mystery nothing to
have us criminal we were going to be
busy
I born in Soviet Union in Verona I grew
up in those cocks it's near Chechnya
[Music]
after school I've been recruited to
Soviet Union Army in 1987 I sent to KGB
for 11 years I be an officer of KGB I
met Sasha in 1993 very funny very easy
talking very young looking very handsome
and very strong he worked under
investigation of very serious crime but
inside of Russia after 10 years service
Litvinenko was promoted to a highly
classified unit 1997 I sent to
top-secret Department of KGB my
department has duty killing political
and high businessmen person without
judge verdict in a lot of things what he
was asked to do to kill Boris Berezovsky
and adviser to Boris Yeltsin Berezovsky
had masterminded his reelection in 1996
Litvinenko claimed he worked for a
secret murder squad task with burrows or
skis assassination after I had this
order I said to my boss I refused after
this open operation case against me and
oppress I love Sasha for feeling nor
thirst and if he think something's not
right
in 1998 President Yeltsin appointed
Vladimir Putin is the director of the
KGB now renamed the FSB Litvinenko
raised his concerns about the abuse of
power with his new boss Sasha said I'm
going to see a new director vladimir
putin say what they're going to say I'll
go tell him everything what I know about
corruption I have meeting with Putin
face of face
what Sasha mentioned immediately was
very soft handshake I bring to Putin
material about criminal inside FSB
Putin took obviously opposite side
later that year leper yangko and a
handful of colleagues took the
extraordinary step of blowing the
whistle on state corruption at a press
conference in Moscow organized study
spots are delimiters on stimulates me
near constitute or not select pizza
pasta students delicious
how sweet just a politics American teeny
trailer when I asked Sasha what might
happen to us after this press conference
he said marina we have two ways one way
they will kill me and another way they
will arrest me
[Music]
Litvinenko was arrested and spent over a
year in jail
in 2000 he was released and fled the
country I must escape from Russia
we sit in aeroplanes went to London so
it's safe my wife and son asked
political asylum
[Music]
despite being in great pain he continued
to answer police questions for more than
nine hours over three days and nights
you've never ever asked for rest he just
said just please we need to work there
was a clock ticking the idea was
investigators to talk to him in as much
detail in the short time he had left to
elicit everything he knew because you
weren't gonna get a second chance to
take a witness statement for him up to
now only a handful of people had seen
Alexander Litvinenko in hospital his
wife marina released a photo to show the
world the impact of the poisoning
I remember Sasha didn't like to look
like that but in this moment Sasha said
take this photo and I want people to see
what they might do against people
photographs showing his dramatic decline
in health were released this evening as
Scotland Yard said its counterterrorism
unit was now leading an intensive
investigation
[Music]
there's my chronic picture of sashes I
called him he carries quite a lot of
emotion for me and he did for the team
at the time I what he doesn't capture is
it doesn't capture the incredible
suffering that he was in it doesn't
capture the fact his throat was all
blistered and he couldn't swallow you
could hardly talk he was in diabolical
pain
Litvinenko knew that the heavy-metal
thallium was a poison of choice to the
KGB
when he was diagnosed was poisoned now
it was like a knowledge to know what
happened to him before that he became
worse but nobody can explain why the
problem was that though it appeared
Litvinenko had been poisoned no one
could say exactly what with we were
pretty confident that it was not going
to be thallium you know that left us
with nothing because all of the other
heavy metals that we had looked for
which are commonly used as poisons the
screen for those was also negative
[Music]
with no medical explanation for
Litvinenko's decline the police sought
other ways to move the investigation
forward post mortem is one of the most
valuable tools in informing murder
inquiries and sasha was obviously living
and so I wanted to do they couldn't have
a living post-mortem on Sasha do
everything we can as if he'd died to try
and find out have we got any puncture
wounds look at all his samples like
everything examine him head to toe see
if we can find you know that trigger
that reason that's led to his illness
could a chemotherapy drug have been
given to him could another heavy metal
of being them culprit and then the idea
of some radioactive substance was
discussed one of our experts said well
in them in the saucers urine we found a
tiny spike of polonium but is probably
an anomaly in the plastic container so
I'm sitting there and obviously we've
all grown up watching James Bond and we
all know plutonium we all know uranium
so I say polonium don't you mean
plutonium so this fell a very very
tolerant recess Mike life
I mean polonium 210 was polonium 210
it's the most toxic substance known to
men okay how do we find out
a liter of little Yenko urine was sent
to the high-security atomic weapons
establishment at alder master but the
tests would take almost 24 hours to
complete meanwhile Litvinenko's life was
slipping away for me it was not enter
yet it's still enough power to fight for
his life
she smiled to me and said to me now I
love you very much but this time when
she said it was just so painful because
it looks like he said goodbye
Litvinenko had been fighting the poison
for over 21 days and now he was sliding
in and out of consciousness the pumping
function of his heart deteriorated until
on the night of the 22nd he suddenly
collapsed and went into cardiac arrest
the posh belvane
when I first arrived somebody had
already started resuscitation so there's
about probably six of us in the room
time goes very slowly during cardiac
arrest he had about 30 minutes of
resuscitation
[Music]
when we get a patient back it's that's a
good moment so you've done something
right for the patient
[Music]
at 3:00 p.m. experts from the atomic
weapons establishment called Scotland
Yard with the results of Litvinenko's
urine tests it was a phone call his 10
years going to have a cleric I remember
it I remember it like that
he's polonium it's a million times a
lethal dose
he's dead no he's he's he's not he's not
thatis he's very poorly based alive
like life he's dead
[Music]
nine o'clock on the evening of the 23rd
he suffered a further cardiac arrest
[Music]
we're sorry to announce that Alexander
Litvinenko died at University College
Hospital at 9:21 on the 23rd of November
I remember it was quite young doctor who
came to us and said unfortunately we
tried everything but your husband just
passed away
I think can I see him
disease of course you can see him and
when we came to his room Anatole was
with me ever and some EMF level get
better he will recover and then quite
honestly to me personally but when he
actually died under 20 Fernand came to
me as a massive shock because like it's
over like it's sort of final few days I
kept thinking he was going to recover
[Music]
I'm still remember human different way
was it very handsome but more important
thing I could hug him in the last time I
could kiss him and I could feel his
smell we now know the former Russian spy
was poisoned by radioactive polonium and
that is a first in the United Kingdom
I'd never heard of polonium-210 I know
nothing about radioactivity or about
radioactive isotopes but it was
absolutely clear that this was something
completely out of the ordinary and it
just changed the whole nature of what we
were dealing with polonium is extremely
rare five thousand times more
radioactive than radium and when
swallowed just one millionth of a gram
is enough to kill for Scotland Yard the
intensive care unit was now a crime
scene
it was sealed off with Litvinenko's body
to protect both evidence and staff where
the murder victim and the bodies is
always a crime scene
however they were contaminated polonium
or no one knew what to do we didn't
they're safe it was what we have now is
a murder inquiry plain and simple you
got to stick to the facts now in this
case what that transpired as being was
following the polonium trail around
London the places he visited are now
being searched and radioactive it have
now been referred to a special traces of
the substance that's believed a ratio to
the public is very low
remember coming out of a cobra meeting
and there was a whole horde of
photographers and reporters outside on
the pavement and I'm a voice shouting at
me mr. Clarke are the public safe I
remember thinking to myself I haven't
got a clue I don't know the polonium
that killed Litvinenko is very difficult
to manufacture this is something that is
made in a reactor and therefore you have
to have access to the products of a
reactor and the place where that is made
in Russia is a very high-security
operation indeed so it was perfectly
clear I mean that was a real marker of
who might be involved
smear chilaka ataxic the tragedy mr.
Geum na school-community asthma
medicines comes a cuchini Britain
sketchy near to Kazan in a toaster della
cisterna smear Scotland Yard now had to
work out how the polonium had been
brought into the UK and identify the
assassin the clues were to be found in
the extraordinary interview Liburnian
code recorded just before his death I
have no doubt who wanted this this was
done by Russian Secret Service because I
have knowledge of the system I know that
to kill a citizen of another country
this water can be given by only one
person this person is President of the
Russian Federation Vladimir Putin
the focus for me was to look to see
who'd had the opportunity to poison him
I was surprised at the presence of mind
he had as he was working through the
possibilities of the various people that
he'd met on the first of November he was
working through it very much with a
detectives mind
Litvinenko told police that the day he
fell ill he met with an Italian
intelligence analyst Mario Scaramella
called to my home phone Mario said to me
Alexander please meeting
[Music]
Scaramella had sought Litvinenko's
advice for an italian parliamentary
inquiry into allegations that the KGB
had tried to influence the Italian
government
mrs. Asha please don't eat because we're
going to have this special dinner it's
the first of November it's already six
years since we came to UK and first time
when will British citizen
I find Mario in square Mario asked me go
eating first restaurant it's so opposite
Bond Street
he suggests that we should sit somewhere
quiet have something to eat and talk
he's very very nervous he start talking
very fast so she couldn't really
understand why the meeting was really
important
wiping cold day and he flicked his
suspicions later
Scotland Yard sent an investigation team
to itsu restaurant
how do you search for Polonia the u.s.
is searched for it with something a bit
like a Dirt Devil Hoover because
polonium crosses radioactive and it's
dangerous he emits alpha waves and they
only go only go about that far
and so to detect them you have to be
that close to them
soon after they got in there remembers
getting a phone call we've got positive
indication of alpha radiation itsu
restaurant could be on murder venue you
could treat it as a claim of Cluedo
that's not belittling the approach to it
but clue don't you have a run you have a
killer you have a weapon and when you
get those things in your envelope you
generally solved it Mario Scaramella
became a person of interest if you're
exposed to it what happens is is that
you should creat it and you secrete it
through sweat and you can't control that
secretion so when you secrete it through
sweat in fact we can when you touch
something you pick something like we
touch something we can actually map what
you've been Scaramella had stayed at a
thistle hotel in Victoria
very quickly we established that the
hotel they stayed in wasn't contaminated
and mr. Scaramella it wasn't
contaminated at all and so what we shall
see him being involved they were fair
that they were fairly remote
but why is a sous restaurant
contaminated
the analysis when it was done goes to
show that the West's camera had been
sitting with Litvinenko when they had
lunch on the women of the first that
wasn't where the contamination was
filmed turned out that that actually it
was at a different table to the one
which Scaramella and Nippon yangko had
sat at on the first of November you
could have taken a view that in the
crude envelope each new restaurant was
the venue polonium was the murder weapon
thank you very much have a lovely day
and then suddenly the envelope is ripped
up and thrown away police needed to
explain the traces of polonium on the
second table added soon
the clues again lay in Litvinenko's
police interview he had another meeting
the day he fell ill on Tuesday I have
meeting planned with Russian people
first person Andrey Lugovoy
his former KGB officer he had been
bodyguard Prime Minister of Russia the
second man captain he has been Soviet
Army officer maybe a second left and
maybe captain when sasha was in hospital
and when we talked about his suspicious
he might be poisoned and I said but who
who could do this and he mentioned this
meeting Chris Lugovoy and Kovtun in
Millennium Hotel
he has come from the bar and say Sasha I
am here he says that he must leave for
football match so we will talk for 10-15
minutes and no more on the table there
is a few cups and also a teapot I pour
some tea
from the port
for some reason I didn't like it
it's almost called tea I drink maybe
three or four times and after you drank
from the pulp didn't dry or coughed and
drink anything from that pouch know for
sure
the ingestion eating something was
important so they were she was cruising
on this and it was planing might be
definitive in the end he look at his
what'd you say my wife is about to come
bring his son he said this Uncle session
we shake hands and she go
[Music]
police turn their attention to the hotel
in Mayfair where the two suspects stayed
Lugovoy and Kovtun were captured on CCTV
going upstairs to the gents toilets
traces of polonium were found that
matched their movements so we'll go with
a hypothesis that mr. Logan why mr.
Coughlin
they had more than something to do with
it in the 16th of October
mr. Lugovoy mr. Coughlin both came into
the country on a BA flight from Moscow
they went and stayed in the Best Western
Shastri Avenue polonium was found in
that room in the bathroom then police
made their second breakthrough they
discovered Litvinenko had an earlier
meeting with Lugovoy and Kovtun two
weeks before their afternoon tea at the
Millennium the location it's su sushi
bar the table where that sat was the one
on which police had already detected
traces of polonium got contamination
because it's not secondary contamination
it was primary contamination as in
something bad had happened there
you tried to wake him in it's a
restaurant you tried
so he had been attacked on the 16th in
fact he had died as a result of the
attack on the 16th it was that
significant but he was that robust they
it didn't work as quickly as it
shouldn't know after the it to attack
Lugovoy and Kovtun traveled back to
Moscow on a Transaero aircraft we
managed to stop there at Heathrow
Airport that was emotional because they
didn't react all that well to that plane
being stopped
[Music]
the aircraft was checked they did find
traces of planing
210 in retaliation for interfering with
the trans Aero flight the Russian
authorities had placed the tugs that
pushed the aircraft back from the stands
in front of a British Airways jet at
Moscow Airport so this kind of tit for
tat
that started to underpin us on the
political dimensions on this
investigation I think it turned out that
36,000 people have been on planes that
could have been contaminated traces of
radiation found at 12 different
locations including two British Airways
planes in an investigation stretching
right across Europe in pursuit of a
radioactive trail the number of the
scenes that were unraveling on a
day-by-day basis went to about 40 old
scenes and this had been everything from
the hotels that the two key suspects had
stayed in two places where they'd had
meetings together
Litvinenko appeared to have survived the
two attack on the 16th of october
Lugovoy returned to london alone nine
days later detectives believe he flew in
armed to kill
they found evidence in the Sheraton Park
Lane Hotel we came up with this random
way of describing how safe or not
something could be and they called it a
runaway factor their detection devices
quote were minging unquote I think that
meant it was a huge amount of radiation
in that room they'd had to withdraw from
the rooms fairly quickly extremely high
levels of radiation in the bathroom sink
and pipes led police to believe Lugovoy
had poured the polonium down the drain
it was most nucular scene that has I
think has it ever been found in civilian
circumstances and the runaway factor
there was Usain Bolt esque
[Music]
Litvinenko had ultimately died as a
result of the attack in the Millennium
Hotel but this may have been the last of
three attempts by Lugovoy and Kovtun to
kill him
police were desperate to prove
conclusively the libman Yenko had died
from polonium poisoning eight days after
his death Britain's top pathologists
finally examined the body the autopsy
was a difficult dangerous procedure
levels of polonium that were eventually
found from the tissues were a hundred
fold higher than would be compatible
with life
[Music]
when he opened up all he could see is a
trophy of tissue it's essentially sort
of just dissolved in a slurry as it were
and so it was clear what had been going
on the autopsy confirmed Litvinenko's
death was a direct result of his
ingesting deadly polonium
[Music]
from fairly early on in the inquiry
Andrey Lugovoy and Dmitry Kovtun became
people of interest and so that is why we
wanted to interview them as soon as
possible and that meant sending a team
of officers to Moscow to do just that
the conversation of Peter they to the
section of Bryant RP at the formal
setting for the request tops do you
fancy going to Russia I think it was in
the toilets on the 15th floor in waltz
my boss
I said hello Clive as you would and his
immediate response was our tops my best
man what are you doing for the next
couple of weeks so was it a natural
environment for a challenge sister he
said like that di Bryant our pees team
had been briefed by mi6 about what to
expect in Moscow the thought of having
to lead a team in Moscow was at first
quite daunting there was the obvious
warnings about potential honey traps our
rooms might be bugged or searched I had
left shall we say certain traps which
would indicate to me that my drawers had
been moved or searched
the team's first meeting was with the
Russian general prosecutor
[Music]
we were welcomed by the deputy
ambassador and the general prosecutor I
think there were eight objectives eight
things that we wish to achieve while we
were there the top two of those would be
to interview Lugovoy and Kovtun it's
then that the conversation became a
little more difficult
we believed them to be in a place called
nuclear hospital number six he was
asking what is this nuclear hospital
number six or have never heard of it
this means nothing to me you know we
don't know where they are we have got no
idea where they are how do you know
nuclear hospital number six was a clinic
built to treat the victims of the
Chernobyl disaster
about five o'clock we received a phone
call stating surprisingly he was in
hospital number six and this place did
exist in less than ten minutes we were
in the van
the journey there was quite interesting
they drove very quickly to start with
they didn't seem to know where they were
going themselves and we had to on at
least two occasions do u-turns
to get back out of the area where we
were whether this was to delay us
getting to the hospital or not I don't
know
after two hours driving they arrived at
the hospital just before 9 p.m. the next
point of contention
we were told under no circumstances
would we be allowed to bring any
recording devices with us into the
hospital and the interview will conclude
by 10 o'clock Kaufman was said to be
receiving treatment for exposure to
polonium only once Scotland Yard officer
was permitted to enter the room it
turned out to be a very strange series
of events there was a man in a bed who
he was told was Dmitry Kovtun
the only thing that he could see was the
eyes it could have been anyone sat in
the bed we'll never know who it was
after just 13 minutes the doctor stopped
the interview
of the questions that we had wanted to
be asked
only about half were asked before the
time ran out so it really wasn't
satisfactory from my perspective
to put it simply they were messed about
that the Russians kept saying we're
cooperating that it was unlike any
cooperation that I've ever seen
the Scotland Yard team had been in
Moscow for two days
developments in London were about to
have an impact on their investigation
now it was being treated as a suspicious
death but in the last half-hour Scotland
Yard have confirmed that they are now
treating the poisoning of Alexander
Litvinenko as murder the intelligence
and the critical and the diplomatic
dimensions were all firmly intertwined
and so from a very early stage there was
going to be a certain amount of finger
pointing towards Russia right I was
concerned about the impact of that
change of status to the team in Russia
did it pose the challenge
most definitely you're interviewing
their Nationals and you've seen them as
a witness and then suddenly you've
announced it's a murder it must have
been fairly clear that actually there
was a picture was unfolding which I fear
the Russian government would not want us
to explore but the most or hospitals
Kester animalism
Politico Google Mozilla II nicodemus
professional Norris Lithuania is
positive it's Eid magnetronic accord
politically company I'm approached
Fattah it androgynous animal suggested
she provenance alert after six
frustrating days of waiting an interview
with the second suspect Andrey Lugovoy
was cancelled at short notice the
Russians also announced the coffins
health was declining rapidly
hours after giving evidence to
investigators in Moscow today mr. Corton
reportedly fell into a coma and is in a
critical condition from radiation
poisoning the investigation had stalled
and the team encountered another
unexpected problem I remember one
evening my officer was complaining of
stomach cramp and not being very well
early the next morning I was to
accompany him back to the general
prosecutor's office we were offered tea
I had no hesitation in saying yes I have
a cup of tea please so I had the cup of
tea and we left I started to feel a
little uncomfortable and not wanting to
put too fine a point on it I had two
shits I have no doubt in my mind that we
were probably poisoned but something
like gastroenteritis I think that there
was a deliberate ploy to weaken us
physically because we were the we were
the decision-makers in the team he
didn't stop them doing what they did he
just meant they had to do it in short
bursts
the following date RP and the team were
escorted back to hospital number six to
interview the second suspect Andrey
Lugovoy
again we were told that he was a sick
patient in the hospital and the
interviews would be conducted there we
were told that we could not bring any
recording devices into the hospital so
we were totally reliant on the on the
Russians recording this the police were
also told the interview would be
conducted in Russian because Lugovoy
spoke no English
when Lugovoy was interviewed he looked
as fit as a fiddle
he wasn't bandaged and was there in his
own clothes and probably had only just
turned up at the hospital I suppose I
can tell you what I hoped for I hope for
an account that could give us an
opportunity to prove or disprove what
they said I thought that why this has
been recorded so we'll get what it is
that's been said and we can compare that
to the notes that have been taken
at the end of the interview Lugovoy car
smoked and said good luck with your
investigation in English
[Music]
after two weeks in Moscow the Scotland
Yard detectives were ready to return
home all the remained was to collect
copies of the evidence from the Russian
general prosecutor
[Music]
they agreed that they would just film
the evidence been handed to me I was
presented with a bundle of interviews
and tapes we took the evidence with us
back on the flight back to London the
Scotland Yard team arrived back in
London the following evening I was very
glad to be back in the UK and now I was
equally glad to be able to hand over the
bundle of interviews and tapes
the next day Tuppy received a phone call
from Scotland Yard forensics it was one
of the forensic management team he was
asking was there another Lugovoy tape
and at first I couldn't understand what
he meant by that and I said no I've
given you the tapes and I said why I
can't remember exactly where I was when
I found out from tops that what was
probably the most important output from
that whole deployment it never made it
on a plane
the recording of Lugovoy vital interview
was missing from the evidence package
handed over by the Russian authorities
I'd been outmaneuvered like a chess
piece by the Russians was an accident he
didn't tell me that tops or anyone else
had been unprofessional it's ok we've
been done
one month after his death Alexander
Litvinenko his body was still so
radioactive it had to be placed in a
lead-lined coffin for burial it was not
original coffin it was a sum from Neto
and they said if we decide one day to
take his coffin from grave it would be
allowed only after 30 years Alexander
Litvinenko was buried in Highgate
Cemetery he was 44 years old police
believed that Lugovoy and Kovtun had
poisoned Litvinenko in the Millennium
Hotel Mayfair but after being frustrated
in Moscow they still needed to build a
cast-iron case by proving how the
polonium had been administered this
expert advice said that there'll be no
trace of polonium left on anything that
has been washed for two times the
dishwasher don't bother doing the
teapots teacups sauces teaspoons because
you'll be wasting your time but all the
instincts were yet gone let's have a go
I came back as a full scale deflection
on this teapot full scale deflection so
what does that mean it meant that there
was a smoking teapot it's not so much a
smoking gun by it was significant the
contamination in the teapot leads of
course inescapably too often and Lugovoy
the police had the last piece of the
puzzle and handed the evidence over to
the Crown Prosecution Service five
months later the CPS formally sought the
extradition of Lugovoy on a charge of
murder our position was that if Lugovoy
ork often left the country and went to a
jurisdiction where they were
extraditable we would seek to extradite
them Lugovoy and Kovtun denied the
allegations in the Russian media right
each is delivered skim film on the
caution film producer moon Buscemi Tom
Tacoma power in the freedom would polka
party Steve nutritive I was REME Britons
in December 2007 Lugovoy became a member
of Russia's Parliament giving him
immunity from prosecution
the Home Secretary Theresa May ruled out
a public inquiry fearing about damage
relations with Russia but finally in
2014 under pressure from the High Court
she changed her mind
[Music]
more than eight years after Litvinenko's
death the public inquiry opened at the
High Court in London for me it was
already like I've done it I'm really
satisfied because it was very important
to bring information to public
Lugovoy and Kovtun poisoned it and you
will decide on all of the evidence
whether or not they were sponsored by
the Russian state some people started to
say mmm
we're not sure they're going to do
anything against Russia and they said
they probably will just close this case
I'm not going to do anything
[Music]
finally judge Sir Robert Owen delivered
his verdict I have concluded that there
is a strong probability that when mr.
Lugovoy poisoned mr. livenko he did so
under the direction of the FSB I have
further concluded that the FSB operation
to kill mr. Lippman Enka was probably
approved by mr. Khrushchev then head of
the FSB and also by President Putin
[Music]
was very powerful verdict
it was named Putin and we've been just
like over hampt so huge victory and it's
a pretty remarkable victory considering
the forces were behind my father's
murder
it doesn't mean Lugovoy and Kovtun who
certain committed this crime going to be
sent to the prison but you even you're
not in prison but you already punished
to wake up and go to sleep
to know people knew you are criminal you
are murder
the investigation had been the most
complex dangerous and technically
demanding ever undertaken by British law
enforcement
this was the Metropolitan Police and
place in the UK at its best they gave an
incredible amount which means a huge
amount to me he meant accused him out
for marina and I couldn't be more proud
of of them he was a real man he was a
notable agent he was just a human and a
real man is a father as a husband good
luck take care of course justice hasn't
been done for this extent but when you
consider the situation under the
circumstances under which my father was
murdered
it's pretty amazing we got any semblance
of justice at all how does this person
in your heart you can leave but anyway
you heart has a big hole I believe he is
able to see everything what happened and
I hope his proudest
[Music]
Maryna now knows her husband's story has
been told and if he is disputed within
the people that applies to they can
happily Bowl up here and have their day
in court to explain their story and
I'd pick a tail
[Music]
you